---
title: "UN-aligned in 2019"
date: 2020-01-04T22:07:30+02:00
authors: ["Adrian Liberto"]
url: "un-aligned-news/un-aligned-in-2019"
categories: 
  - "Un Aligned News"
image: "/images/A-journey-to-the-forgotten-lands-of-Kurdistan.png"
---

2019 was a momentous year for UN-aligned! The organisation was launched in May after years of preparation and it only took a few months to attract members from all over the world. The first months were focussed on perfecting and consolidating the website and communication structures, including the magazine and language options. We also worked on the services we provide to our members, such as the free English language courses to promote a lingua franca and the virtual library. Moreover, much energy was invested in the writing of a book that will challenge the structures and mechanisms of the United Nations; this should be ready for publication in Spring 2020. 

Whilst all these objectives proved successful, the [magazine](https://un-aligned.org/the-gordian/) was perhaps the most significant achievement of all in as much as it spread the ideas of UN-aligned beyond its members, generating interest and discussion around the key issues of the organisation: UN reform, the environment and human rights. 

We send a BIG “Thank You!” to all our members and supporters. Unlike many other organisations, UN-aligned **_is_** its members. Each one of you can take the standard and run with it for the promotion of a fairer, healthier and more united world, with the backing of the whole organisation behind you. 

In 2020 we want our impact to be felt. We are now in a position to extend out focus to active campaigns and we will be reporting these in the magazine, which from now on will be called The Gordian in order to highlight our alternative approach to dealing with the messy intricacies of the United Nations. Please help us keep up the momentum and tell us what you are doing to promote our shared vision and we will publish your stories in the magazine.

Here are some other things we will be working on in 2020:

- A monthly competition with prizes that will focus on ways of improving UN-aligned
- A [Facebook group](https://www.facebook.com/groups/636181940253312/) that will act as a forum where ideas can be shared by members and non-members alike
- Inspiring interviews
- Surveys in order to add further insight into our campaigns and activities
- Petitions targeted at policy makers and organisations whose decisions impact the wellbeing of the planet

Of course, the more our members participate, the more we will be able to achieve, so why not add this to your list of New Year’s resolutions? Only together can we cut that [Gordian knot](https://un-aligned.org/the-gordian/) and usher in the changes that will make the world safer, fairer and happier place.
