---
title: "Poems for a Better World: Silence"
date: 2021-11-10T09:53:35+02:00
authors: ["unregisteredauthor"]
url: "culture/silence"
categories: 
  - "Culture"
  - "Human Rights"
tags: 
  - "Literature"
  - "Poems For A Better World"
image: "/images/Ayesha-Kajee.jpg"
---

## i

Silence is explicit  
Silence is complicit  
Complicity is violence  
So in the violence of our silence  
Let us take stock of our complicity 

## ii  
Our complicity silences truth  
Muffles honour, rapes innocence  
The same innocence we plead  
Confronted by shattered delusion  
“We didn’t know” 

## iii  
We wished to not know  
Blinded, deafened, deadened  
We turned away Bedecked ourselves in laurel  
Which now turns to rue 

## iv  
Our silence - yours and mine - is explicit  
It is complicit It is violent  
And in its complicit explicit violence  
We too have bloodied our souls

* * *

## About Ayesha Kajee

Ayesha Kajee, a South African human rights activist and political analyst, has written poems and stories since childhood, but rarely publishes them due to ingrained perfectionism. She was runner up for the Babishaiku haiku prize in 2016. Ayesha previously directed the International Human Rights program at Wits University, where she also lectured in Politics and International Relations. She was briefly director of SA's Freedom of Expression Institute before leaving full-time work to care for an invalid parent. She has worked and travelled in many African countries, with a special research focus on electoral and parliamentary democracy, gender justice, transitional justice and gender rights. Her research work has been widely published in academic circles as well as mainstream media. Ayesha's published work reflects her diverse interests and she is often called upon for media analysis on African politics.

Silence was awarded the second place in the 2021 UN-aligned poetry competition.

[Watch UN-aligned's exclusive interview with Ayesha Kajee.](https://un-aligned.org/interview/ayesha-kajee-on-her-poem-silence/)
