---
title: "Become an UN-aligned member"
description: "UN-aligned is a United Nations for everyone. UN-aligned membership is not limited to nations or bullying super powers or their money. Everyone is welcome! Our membership is 100% free and gives you access to many additional perks."
date: 2019-04-11T03:15:03+03:00
authors: ["UN-aligned"]
url: "register"
image: "/images/Economic-santions03.03.jpg"
---

UN-aligned is a community that is working towards a better United Nations.

If you believe that the current United Nations is failing in its primary duty of safeguarding world peace and human rights, and that reform is not enough to address its inherent problems, then UN-aligned is the right fit for you.

As a member, you can be part of a movement towards a more effective and representative international organisation that puts the needs of individuals and communities before those of nations.

Join UN-aligned now and make a difference in the way we do politics for the betterment of humanity.

**Become a member and get access to:**

- Recieve the latest issue of the Gordian Magazine to your email and contribute to it in anyway you like. 
- Opportunities to participate in UN-aligned's competitions and events.
- The ability to build and manage a cell or parish.

Membership is free and comes with additional perks. However, there are some conditions to consider before joining:

- [Our manifesto](https://un-aligned.org/manifesto/) outlines basic ethical norms that must be upheld by members and parishes. These cannot be violated or demolished by democratic votes, referendums, or national constitutions.
- You must also accept our [privacy policy](https://un-aligned.org/privacy-policy/) and [terms and conditions](https://un-aligned.org/terms-and-conditions/).

Join us by filling the form below:

<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfoYbnLaMPFD8AZqfdCiNM2cebqKXBLmDU754Tl6O4CR1k9TA/viewform?embedded=true" width="640" height="2100" frameborder="0" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0">Loading…</iframe>
